# CS1 Windows Installation

This page shows you how to install the CS 1 software on your PC.  You
will install all of the following:

- Python 2.7
- Eclipse IDE
- PyDev add-on for Eclipse
- The CS 1 library, including graphics software

These instructions are oriented toward Windows 7.  If you are running
a different version of Windows (such as XP or Vista), you will see
some differences from what this page shows.  If you encounter any
trouble installing the software, make sure to come to the
"Install-Fest," 7:00 pm to 10:00 pm on Tuesday, September 11 in 003
Sudikoff.

## Install Python 2.7

Python 2.7 can be downloaded
[here](http://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.7.2/python-2.7.2.msi).

Once it has finished downloading, double-click on the installer to run
it.  Once the installer is running, click *Next* three times.  This
should start the actual installation.  Once the installation is
complete, click *Finish*.

## Install Eclipse

Eclipse is the name of the software program you will use to type in
your Python programs and run them.  Download it:

* [Eclipse IDE]( http://www.eclipse.org/downloads/download.php?file=/eclipse/downloads/drops/R-3.7-201106131736/eclipse-SDK-3.7-win32.zip&url=http://eclipse.mirrors.tds.net/downloads/drops/R-3.7-201106131736/eclipse-SDK-3.7-win32.zip&mirror_id=52).

Since the Eclipse download provides a compressed file, extract it by
right-clicking on the download, and selecting *Extract All...* or
*Extract Here*.  If you're asked to select a folder to extract to,
choose an easily accessed location, such as your Desktop.  Click
*Next* or *OK* whenever you see these buttons, and if you see a
*Finish* button, click it.

A window with a single folder labeled *eclipse* should pop up.  Drag
this folder to somewhere on your computer that you can access easily,
perhaps your Desktop.

Open the *eclipse* folder, and run *Eclipse*. Since this is your first
time running *eclipse*, the following dialog box will pop up:

![](workspace-launcher.png)

You will have your name instead of Betty.  Check the box that says
*Use this as the default and do not ask again* and click *OK*.

Once Eclipse finishes loading, you will see the following screen:

![](welcome-screen.png)

Click the icon that says *Workbench* in the top right.  You will never
see this screen again.

## Install PyDev

The PyDev add-on for Eclipse can be downloaded within Eclipse.  To
start, run Eclipse.  You should see the Eclipse window:

![](eclipse-window.png)

From the menu bar, select *Help* and then *Install New Software...*.

![](install-new-software.png)

The following dialog box should pop up:

![](available-software.png)

Click *Add...* in the top right. 

In this dialog box, under *Name*, type *PyDev*.  Under *Location*,
type *http://pydev.org/updates*

![](add-repository.png)

Click *OK* on this dialog box.  Once Eclipse loads the software list,
make sure that *PyDev* has a check next to it, and then click *Next*:

![](pydev-check.png)

(Ignore the red ellipse around *Add...*; I added that by mistake.)
Read and agree to the Eclipse licence, and then click *Finish*.

While Pydev is installing, the following dialog box may pop up.  Check
the box next to *Aptana PyDev* and click *OK*:

![](aptana-pydev.png)

When Pydev has finished installing, click *Restart Now* to restart
Eclipse.

## Configure Eclipse and check your installation

Next, you will configure Eclipse and check that you have installed
Eclipse and PyDev correctly.  Click on the circled icon next to *Java*
in the top right:

![](sdk.png)

Then select *Other...*:

![](other.png)

You'll see this window:

![](open-perspective.png)

Click on *PyDev* and then click *OK*.

Under the *File* menu, select *New* and then *PyDev Project*.

![](new-pydev-project.png)

This window will appear:

![](pydev-project.png)

Type in a project name.  I used *cs1proj*, but you can use whatever
project name you like.

Then click on *Please configure an interpreter in the related
preferences before proceeding.* You'll get this window:

![](python-interpreter.png)

Click *New...*.  You'll see this window:

![](select-interpreter.png)

Next to *Interpreter Name:*, type *Python 2.7*.  Then click on the
*Browse...* button to the right of *Interpreter Executable:*.  You'll
have to navigate to find where you installed Python.  Start at your
main hard drive (probably called *C:*).  From there, select
*Python27*, then *python.exe*.  Then click *Open*, then *OK*.

Now you'll see this window:

![](selection-needed.png)

Click on *OK*.  Now you'll see this window:

![](interpreters-after.png)

Click on *OK*.  Now you're back to this one:

![](pydev-project-updated.png)

Click *Finish*.

Right-click on this link: [pyversion.py](pyversion.py).  Save it as
*pyversion.py* on your Desktop.  Then drag the *pyversion.py* icon
from the Desktop to where it says *cs1proj* (or whatever project name
you chose) in the *PyDev Package Explorer* tab of your Eclipse window.
The triangle next to *cs1proj* will point downward, and you'll see
what's now in your *cs1proj*:

![](with-cs1proj.png)

Single-click on *pyversion.py*.  Then, from the *Run* menu, select
*Run As* and then *1 Python Run*:

![](one-python-run.png)

If all went well, you'll see this:

![](all-went-well.png)

At the bottom of the window, you'll have a *Console* tab, and it
should read something like

~~~
2.7.2 (default, Jun 12 2011m 15:08:59) [MSC v.1500 32 (Intel)]
~~~

At this point, you have a working version of Eclipse that will enable
you to run Python programs.  But you cannot yet run programs with
graphics, so we'll set that up next.

## Install the graphics software

The course staff has written a collection of Python functions that
will let you easily draw graphics with your Python programs.

Download the [qt
library](http://get.qt.nokia.com/qt/source/qt-win-opensource-4.7.4-mingw.exe).
Double-click on the downloaded file, which will start the installer
and agree to all questions.

Download the [pyside library](PySide-1.1.0qt474.win32-py2.7.exe), and
double-click on the downloaded file.  Agree to all questions, and
click *Next* whenever you have the opportunity.

Now download [cs1lib.py](http://www.cs.dartmouth.edu/~cs1/cs1lib.py).
You will be accessing this file *a lot*, so I suggest putting it in an
easily accessed place, such as your Desktop.  Drag *cs1lib.py* onto
*cs1proj* in the *PyDev Package Explorer* tab of Eclipse:

![](with-cs1lib.png)

Next, download [eyes.py](http://www.cs.dartmouth.edu/~cs1/eyes.py).
Drag *eyes.py* from wherever you downloaded it to onto *cs1proj* in
the *PyDev Package Explorer* tab of Eclipse:

![](with-eyes.png)

Single-click on *eyes.py*.  Then, from the *Run* menu, select *Run As*
and then *1 Python Run*.  You should get a window like this one:

![](eyes-image.png)

If you see this window, you are done!  Yay!
