# Short Assignment #3:  How Rich Am I? \
Due: Friday, January 13

*Read the entire assignment before you start designing your program or
writing any code.*

In the year 0 A.D., my ancestor Brutus Cormen deposited `$`1.00 in the
Bank of Rome.  (OK, it wasn't a real dollar; it was the Roman
equivalent of a dollar. Probably some kind of big coin with a hole in
the middle.)  The bank promised to pay 5% interest compounded once a
year.  Each year the bank added to his account 5% of the previous
year's balance.  In other words, they multiplied his balance by 1.05
once each year, so that at the end of the year 1 A.D., the balance was
`$`1.05; at the end of the year 2 A.D., the balance was `$`1.1025; at
the end of the year 3 A.D., the balance was `$`1.157625; and so on.
Since old Brutus was not around to withdraw it (Julie Caesar's
descendants took care of that), the balance has accumulated nicely up
to the present day.  Because I am his rightful heir, the bank account
is now mine.  Bwa-ha-ha!!

## Problem 1

Your first job is to write a Python program that computes my current
wealth: the balance of the account after 5% interest was compounded
2012 times.

## Problem 2

In an amazing coincidence, our section leader Steffi Ostrowski has an
ancestor, Portia Ostrowski, who also deposited money in the Bank of
Rome in the year 0 A.D.  Back then, the Ostrowskis were much better
off than the Cormens, and Portia Ostrowski deposited `$`100,000.00.
But P. O. did not know that in business, you don't get what you
deserve&mdash;you get what you negotiate&mdash;and she was able to get
only a 4% interest rate on her deposit, so that her balance multiplied
by 1.04 each year.

Your job is to write a Python program that computes the first year in
which Brutus's balance exceeds Portia's balance, and prints out that
year and the two balances in that year.

## What to do and how to do it

You should use variables with names in all-capitals at the top of your
program for the initial deposit amounts, interest rates, and for
Problem 1, the current year.  By convention, variable names in
all-capitals indicate that the variable's value should never be
changed after the initial assignment.

When you print out balances, they will be large.  You will want to
store them as floats, and just let the float values print normally.
(They should print with scientific notation.)  Your output should be
nicely formatted.  For example, if the current year were year 2 (not
year 2012), the output of Problem 1 should read something like

~~~
At year 2, the balance is 1.1025.
~~~

Your output does not have to read exactly the same as mine, but it
should read like an English sentence with spaces and punctuation in
the right places.  Remember that you can concatenate strings with the
`+` operator, and you can convert a number to a string with Python's
`str` function.  And, of course, you should program your solution to
Problem 1 to use the year 2012.

To compute the balances, use while-loops in which each iteration
multiplies each balance by the appropriate factor.  Do not use
exponentiation to calculate balances.  Start with the appropriate
balances, and use loops to repeatedly multiply the balances by the
appropriate amounts each time.  Each iteration should correspond to
one year.

Submit your programs for the two problems, along with runs that show
the answers.

##  A helpful hint

I found it quite helpful, when developing my programs, to include a
print statement within the body of the loop to show the year and the
balances in each iteration of the loop.  That way, I could verify that
my program was doing the right thing.  I then removed the print
statement from my loop before declaring my program complete.  Of
course, I left in a print call after the loop, to print the answer.
You should consider doing the same thing, but make sure to remove the
print call within the loop body&mdash;or comment it out&mdash;before
submitting your program and its output.

## What to turn in

1. how_rich.py (or whatever you called the program for Problem 1).

2. portia.py (or whatever you called the program for Problem 2).

3. A screenshot to show the output of running how_rich.py.

4. A screenshot to show the output of running portia.py.

Please remember in all assignments that editing the output of the
program before printing it is a violation of the Academic Honor
Principle.  Make sure that the output you turn in comes from the
program that you turn in.  If you make any change to the code, no
matter how insignificant you think it might be, rerun your program to
produce new output!

## How to turn in your assignment

You have a section leader.  That section leader has a special e-mail
account

cs1-xxx@cs.dartmouth.edu

where xxx will be replaced with your section leader's first name.  So
for example, if your section leader is Bertha, then e-mail
cs1-bertha@cs.dartmouth.edu.  You can find this email account in the
Recitation Sections area on the course [Blackboard
site](https://blackboard.dartmouth.edu/).

Send your section leader an e-mail with the title "Short assignment 3
submission."  Attach the files that you need to turn in.
