# CS1 Mac Installation

This page shows you how to install the CS 1 software on your Mac.  You
will install all of the following:

- Python 2.7
- Eclipse IDE
- PyDev add-on for Eclipse
- The CS 1 library, including graphics software

If you encounter any trouble installing the software, make sure to
come to the "Install-Fest," 7:00 pm to 10:00 pm on Tuesday, September 11, in 003 Sudikoff.

## Install Python 2.7

You'll first need to download and install Python.  There are different
versions; which one you should use depends on your version of MacOS X.
You can check your MacOS X version number by choosing the *About This
Mac* menu item from the Apple menu at the upper left corner of your
screen.  You will see three numbers.  For example, mine says *Version
10.6.8*.  The first number will be 10, and the last number doesn't
matter.  The middle number is the important one, and it will probably
be 5, 6, or 7, indicating OS X 10.5, 10.6, or 10.7, respectively.

Then click on one of the links below to download the Python
installation package:

* [Python for OS X 10.6 or 10.7](http://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.7.2/python-2.7.2-macosx10.6.dmg)
* [Python for OS X 10.3 through 10.6](http://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.7.2/python-2.7.2-macosx10.3.dmg).

If you get a .dmg file, drag it to your Desktop and double-click it.
You will see an icon for *Python 2.7.2*.  If it doesn't open
automatically, double-click on *Python 2.7.2*.  You should see
something like this:

![](4_pkmg.png)

Double click on the *Python.mpkg* icon to start the Python installer:

![](5_pyinstall.png)

Click through this entire installer.  At some point it will probably
ask you for your password to install; enter your password and
continue.

You will soon get to a "success" screen like this:

![](6_success.png)

If you do *not* get to the "success" screen, first double-check that
you downloaded the right installer for your operating system: the 10.3
installer won't work, for example, with 10.7.  If things still aren't
working, ask Weifu or a section leader for help.

If everything is OK so far, drag the .dmg file to the Trash.

## Install Eclipse

Eclipse is the name of the software program you will use to type in
your Python programs and run them.  Download it:

* [Eclipse IDE](http://www.eclipse.org/downloads/download.php?file=/technology/epp/downloads/release/indigo/R/eclipse-jee-indigo-macosx-cocoa.tar.gz&url=http://carroll.aset.psu.edu/pub/eclipse/technology/epp/downloads/release/indigo/R/eclipse-jee-indigo-macosx-cocoa.tar.gz&mirror_id=546).

If you're asked what to do with the file, choose to open it with
*Archive Utility*.  Otherwise, you should extract it by
double-clicking on the downloaded file.  A window with a single folder
labeled *eclipse* should pop up.  Once you see the *eclipse* folder,
drag this folder to the *Applications* folder on your hard drive.

Open the *eclipse* folder.  Because you'll be running Eclipse often,
you will probably want to add it to the dock by dragging the *Eclipse*
icon to your dock.

Run Eclipse, either by clicking on the *Eclipse* icon in the dock (if
you put it here) or by double-clicking on the *Eclipse* icon in the
*eclipse* folder.  Since this is your first time running Eclipse, the
following dialog box will pop up:

![](eclipse1.png)

Your account name will appear instead of *thc*.  Check the box that
says *Use this as the default and do not ask again*, and click *OK*.

Once Eclipse finishes loading, you will see the following screen:

![](eclipse2.png)

Click the icon that says *Workbench* in the top right.  You will never
see this screen again.  Now you'll see this window:

![](eclipse3.png)

## Install PyDev

The PyDev add-on for Eclipse can be downloaded within Eclipse.  To
start, run Eclipse.  You should see the Eclipse window:

![](pydev1.png)

From the menu bar, select *Help* and then *Install New Software...*.

![](pydev2.png)

The following dialog box should pop up:

![](pydev3.png)

Click *Add...* in the top right. 

In this dialog box, under *Name*, type *PyDev*.  Under *Location*,
type *http://pydev.org/updates*

![](pydev4.png)

Click *OK* on this dialog box.  Once Eclipse loads the software list,
make sure that *PyDev* has a check next to it, and then click *Next*:

![](pydev5.png)

You'll see this window:

![](pydev5a.png)

Click *Next*.  Read and agree to the Eclipse license, and then click
*Finish*.

While Pydev is installing, the following dialog box may pop up.  Check
the box next to *Aptana PyDev* and click *OK*:

![](pydev6.png)

When Pydev has finished installing, click *Restart Now* to restart
Eclipse.

## Configure Eclipse and check your installation

Next, you will configure Eclipse and check that you have installed
Eclipse and PyDev correctly.  Click on the circled icon next to *Java
EE* in the top right:

![](check1.png)

Then select *Other...*:

![](check2.png)

You'll see this window:

![](check3.png)

Click on *PyDev* and then click *OK*.

Under the *File* menu, select *New* and then *PyDev Project*.

![](check4.png)

This window will appear:

![](check5.png)

Type in a project name.  I used *cs1proj*, but you can use whatever
project name you like.

Then click on *Please configure an interpreter in the related
preferences before proceeding.* You'll get this window:

![](check6.png)

Click *New...*.  You'll see this window:

![](check7.png)

Next to *Interpreter Name:*, type *Python 2.7*.  Then click on the
*Browse...* button to the right of *Interpreter Executable:*.  You'll
have to navigate to find where you installed Python.  Start at your
main hard drive (probably called *Macintosh HD*, but it might have a
different name.  I have a solid-state drive, and its name is *Macintosh
SSD*.)  From there, select *Library*, then *Frameworks*, then
*Python.framework*, then *Versions*, then *2.7*, then *bin*, and
finally *python2.7*.  Then click *Open*, then *OK*.

Now you'll see this window:

![](check8.png)

Click on *OK*.  Now you'll see this window:

![](check9.png)

Click on *OK*.  Now you're back to this one:

![](check10.png)

Click *Finish*.

Download the file [pyversion.py](pyversion.py).  For convenience, move
this file from your *Downloads* folder to your Desktop.  Then drag the
*pyversion.py* icon from the Desktop to where it says *cs1proj* (or
whatever project name you chose) in the *PyDev Package Explorer* tab
of your Eclipse window.  The triangle next to *cs1proj* will point
downward, and you'll see what's now in your *cs1proj*:

![](check11.png)

Single-click on *pyversion.py*.  Then, from the *Run* menu, select
*Run As* and then *1 Python Run*:

![](check12.png)

If all went well, you'll see this:

![](check13.png)

At the bottom of the window, you'll have a *Console* tab, and it
should read something like

~~~
2.7.2 (v2.7.2:8527427914a2, Jun 11 2011, 15:22:34) 
[GCC 4.2.1 (Apple Inc. build 5666) (dot 3)]
~~~

At this point, you have a working version of Eclipse that will enable
you to run Python programs.  But you cannot yet run programs with
graphics, so we'll set that up next.

## Install the graphics software

The course staff has written a collection of Python functions that
will let you easily draw graphics with your Python programs.

**<em>Important note: This software works only with Mac OS 10.6 and
10.7.  If you are running Mac OS 10.5 or earlier, you will not be able
to use the graphics software on your computer.  You should either
upgrade to Mac OS 10.6 or 10.7, or do all assignments that require
graphics on one of the Macs in 003 Sudikoff.</em>**

Download the [qt
library](http://get.qt.nokia.com/qt/source/qt-mac-opensource-4.7.4.dmg).
Double click the .dmg file to open it, then double-click on *Qt.mpkg*
to install qt.  Agree to all questions, and type your password when
requested.  When the qt installation is done, close up the window, and
drag the .dmg file and the *Qt 4.7.4* icon to the Trash.

Next, download the [pyside library](pyside-1.1.0-qt47-py27apple.pkg),
and then install it by double-clicking on the downloaded file.  When
it asks *How do you want to install this software?*, click on *Install
for all users of this computer*.  Again, you'll be asked for your
password at some point.  When the installation is done, drag the .pkg
file that you just downloaded to the Trash.

Now download [cs1lib.py](http://www.cs.dartmouth.edu/~cs1/cs1lib.py).
You will be accessing this file *a lot*, so I suggest putting it in an
easily accessed place, such as your Desktop.  Drag *cs1lib.py* onto
*cs1proj* in the *PyDev Package Explorer* tab of Eclipse:

![](graphics1.png)

Next, download [eyes.py](http://www.cs.dartmouth.edu/~cs1/eyes.py).
Drag *eyes.py* from wherever you downloaded it to onto *cs1proj* in
the *PyDev Package Explorer* tab of Eclipse:

![](graphics2.png)

Single-click on *eyes.py*.  Then, from the *Run* menu, select *Run As*
and then *1 Python Run*.  You should get a window like this one:

![](graphics3.png)

If you see this window, you are done!  Yay!

*A note:* You might also see some red text in the *Console* tab, with
some indecipherable but ominous message containing
`__NSAutoreleaseNoPool()`.  You'll see this message whenever you use
the CS 1 graphics package.  Foreboding though it appears to be, it is
harmless.  Don't worry about it.
